# Italian Dialect & Pidginization in The United States

Italy has a rich linguistic history that time from the Roman Empire to the present day in time, and from the Old World to the New World in space. What sets Italy apart from many other countries is that: (1) it didn’t implement an official language until the end of the 19th century; (2) most people didn’t learn the official Italian language until the middle of the 20th century (~1950); and (3) many people still to this day use their native tongue (‘dialect’) at home, among friends and family, and in their home villages. 

It wasn’t until 1877 when the linguistic unification of modern-day Italy had been declared—and still, in 1931, only a mere 15% of Italians had likely received enough education to acquire fluency over the Italian language (Carnevale 25-26). This, combined with mass emigration to the Americas, caused extraordinary linguistic phenomena in the Americas. 

It was not coincidence that Emmannuelle and Michael DeBonis, my great-great- and great- grandfathers (respectively), ended up in Greenwich Village, a neighborhood on Manhattan’s lower west side that was dominated by southern-Italian immigrants.

In fact, it could be seen that, for immigrants like my grandfathers, migrating to an area where others from the same village resided was actually a vitality.	 When they left Italy, neither of them had any formal education in the Italian language, and they didn’t know a lick of English; they spoke only an Italian dialect. The linguistic unification of modern-day Italy had only been declared in 1877—just 50 years earlier—and still, in 1931, a mere 15% of Italians had likely received enough education to acquire fluency over the standard Italian language (Carnevale 25-26). Moreover, there were profound differences between the dialects of different regions—sometimes even between villages. Some regional dialects could even be as distinct as two Romance languages (Carnevale 32). This combination of factors denotes that, during this time period, being an immigrant of Italy was not inherently synonymous with being able to communicate with other Italian immigrants. Thus, upon arriving in America, Emmannuelle and Michael probably would have only been apt to communicate confidently with: (1) those of Miglionico; (2) other Lucani immigrants; and, maybe, (3) Barese and Calabrese immigrants, in that order. Language and communication play an essential role in starting a life in a new place, because it is required to find vitalities such as work, housing, and schooling. It was in Greenwich village that they found these fellow southern-Italians, and it was in Greenwich village that they found the resources to begin their new life.

However, Italian immigrants in NYC, like my grandfathers, still came in contact with (and thus had to communicate with) Italian immigrants of other dialects. And so, with this contact and communication between dialects, along with the introduction of English, came a pidginization—an Italian-American dialect of south NYC. 

Although much of this Italian-American dialect in New York City has been lost since the large era of migration between the mid- 19th and 20th centuries, it can still be found in Italian American music. Lou Monte, for example, was an Italian-American singer and songwriter born in Manhattan in 1917. Both of his parents had immigrated to New York from Calabria, and so he was raised speaking an (likely) Americanized version of a Calabrese dialect. Many of his songs contain licks and stanzas of this dialect; others are completely sung in the dialect. His rendition of the classical song, Strada ‘N Fosa, is a great reflection of how distinct this Calabrese dialect is from the Italian language. Here I depict the first stanzas of Monte’s rendition of “Strada ‘N Fosa” in dialect and the glossed (standard) Italian, with respective IPA transcriptions:

|  \-   | Dialect (Calabrese-Americano) | Standard Italian (gloss/guess) | English (approx. gloss) |
| ----- | ----------------------------- | ------------------------------ | ----------------------------- |
| Text (Dialect Approximated) | Mienzu’na strada ‘nfossa <br />Ce simu ditte addieu <br />Solo pé’n’ata via <br /> Ti vegghe patí<br /> <br />Mienzu’na strada ‘nfossa <br />G(C)hianghianu m’ha vasta <br />Eio ca mme ne moro <br /> Te lasso partì | Mezz’una strada bagnata <br />Ci siamo detti addio <br />Solo per un’altro via <br />Ti vedo parti <br /> <br />Mezz’una strada bagnata <br />Piangendo mi hai baciato <br />E io, che m’innamoro <br />Ti lascio parti | In the middle of the wet street <br />We said goodbye<br />Alone for a different road(way) <br />I let you you leave <br /> <br />In the middle of the wet street <br />Crying you kissed me <br />And I, who fell in love <br />I let you leave |
| --- | ------------------------------- | ------------------------------ | ----------------------------- |
| IPA | [mi̯enzzuna stɾada nfo:ssa <br />t͡ʃe simu di:ttadi̯eu̯ <br />solo pe(ɹ) na:ta vi̯a <br />ti ve:ɣɣe pa(ɹ)ti:] <br /> <br />[mi̯enzzuna stɾada nfo:ssa <br />ɣ(k)i̯anɣi̯anu mʰa vasata <br />eʝo kamme ne moɾo <br />te lasso pa(ɹ)ti] | [me:ttssuna stɾada baɲata <br />t͡ʃe si̯amo de:tti addi̯o <br />solo pɛɾ unaltɾo via <br />ti vedo paɾtaɾe] <br /> <br />[me:ttssuna stɾada in fo:ssa <br />pi̯ad͡ʒendo mi ai̯ bat͡ʃato <br />ei̯o, ke miannamoɾo <br />ti laʃo paɾti] | N/A |


